## 1. Introduction and Related Work

A **minimal perfect hash function (MPHF)** is a bijection from a key set \(K\) to the set \(\{0,1,\ldots|K|-1\}\). Such function can be constructed for any set \(K\) (given in advance) and represented using (the theoretical lower bound) 1.44 bits per key (Bellemare et al., 2015; Bellemare et al., 2015; Bellemare et al., 2015). The best known practical methods are: **Recursive Splitting (RecSplit)**(Bellemare et al., 2015) (whose representation sizes is about 1.8 bits/key), **Compress, Hash and Displace (CHD)**(Bellemare et al., 2015) (about 2.1 bits/key), **Pibiri-Trani Hash (PTHash)**(Bellemare et al., 2015) (about 2.2 bits/key), **Genuzio, Ottaviano, Vigna (GOV)**(Bellemare et al., 2015) (about 2.2 bits/key), BDZ (Bellemare et al., 2015; Bellemare et al., 2015) (about 2.6 bits/key), and fingerprint-based MPHF (Bellemare et al., 2015; Bellemare et al., 2015) (about 3 bits/key). All of them are fast. Their expected construction and evaluation times are \(O(|K|)\) (slightly higher in the case of PTHash) and \(O(1)\), respectively.

In this paper, we present an improvement to _fingerprint-based MPHF_ (_FMPH_ for short). FMPH was proposed in (Bellemare et al., 2015), independently in (Bellemare et al., 2015), revisited in (Bellemare et al., 2015), and described in Section 3.

While FMPH is not as space-efficient as the other methods mentioned, it is simple and can be quickly constructed with almost no auxiliary memory. As shown in (Hess et al., 2019), the construction can also be carried out using multiple threads and without keeping the keys in memory. Thanks to the aforementioned features, the authors of (Hess et al., 2019) constructed FMPH for a huge set of \(10^{12}\) keys (using 637 GB of RAM during construction). As far as we know, no other MPHF has yet been constructed for such a large set. Moreover, benchmarks presented in (Hess et al., 2019; Hess et al., 2019; Hess et al., 2019) and in Section 7 suggest that FMPH is quite fast to evaluate (admittedly slower than PTHash, but faster than RecSplit, which is in turn faster than CHD). Additionally, as the benchmarks in Sections 6 and 7 show, the improvements we propose in Section 4 allow FMPH to have a size close to state-of-the-art methods and be noticeably larger only in comparison to RecSplit.

We describe FMPH in detail in Section 3, and summarize other practical MPHFs in Section 2. Our contribution begins in Section 4 where we describe the improvement (called **Fingerprint based perfect hashing with group optimization (FMPHGO)**) of FMPH which can reduce its size. Section 5 provides implementation notes on FMPH and FMPHGO. In Sections 6 and 7, we experimentally study FMPHGO performance, find the best values for its parameters, and compare it to other MPHFs. Section 8 contains conclusions and potential directions for further work. Our implementations of FMPH and FMPHGO are available at [https://github.com/beling/bsuccinct-rs](https://github.com/beling/bsuccinct-rs).

## 2. Related Work - Practical Minimal Perfect Hash Functions

RecSplit (Hess et al., 2019) is based on an observation that for very small sets an MPHF can be efficiently found simply by brute-force searching for a bijection in a family of fully random independent hash functions \(h_{0},h_{1},\ldots\) with suitable codomain. (In fact, we use similar fact in Section 4 to improve FMPH.) To build an MPHF for a larger input set of keys, RecSplit splits this set into smaller ones, using random hash functions. First, one of these functions distributes keys randomly into buckets of average size \(b\). Next, buckets are recursively split (by finding a function that splits it into approximately equal parts) until they reach a target size \(\ell\) on which it is feasible to find an MPHF by brute-force. The resulting rooted trees of splittings (defined by indices of hash functions that provide appropriate splits in interior nodes and bijections in leaves) are stored using integer compression techniques. As a result, RecSplit offers excellent size efficiency, but at the cost of being complex and an evaluation time overhead (caused by the tree traversal and integer decompression). Its \(b\) and \(\ell\) parameters affect the trade-off between its size and the speed of its construction and evaluation.

CHD (Hess et al., 2019) and PTHash (Hess et al., 2019) use _hash and displace_ technique originally introduced by Fox, Chen, and Heath (Fox, 2017). Similar to RecSplit, they first distribute the keys into buckets. However, PTHash does so in a way that results in a more uneven expected distribution. Next, the buckets are sorted and processed by decreasing size. For each bucket, a function is found that maps the keys contained in the bucket to indices \(0,\ldots,n-1\) (where \(n\geq|K|\)), without causing collisions with other keys from the current and previous buckets. The MPHF is determined by the indices describing the functions found. Additionally, if \(n>|K|\) (which is always the case for CHD), then some of the indices \(0,\ldots,n-1\) are left unused and a description of the mapping of the used indices to \(0,\ldots,|K|-1\) (which are the final values that MPHF assigns to the keys) is also stored. Again, integer compression is used to make MPHF compact. CHD and PTHash differ in details. In contrast to CHD, PTHash is designed with great concern for evaluation speed. Benchmarks in (Hess et al., 2019) (as well as those in Section 7) show that occupying only about 10% more space, PTHash can be around four times faster than CHD.

BDZ (Bollinger et al., 2018; Bollinger et al., 2018) finds \(w_{0},\ldots,w_{n-1}\) (\(w_{i}\in\{0,1,2\}\) for all \(i\)) such that \(h_{j(k)}(k)\) is different for each \(k\in K\) and \(j(k)=w_{h_{0}(k)}+w_{h_{1}(k)}+w_{h_{2}(k)}\mod 3\), where \(h_{0}\), \(h_{1}\), \(h_{2}\) are random hash functions that map \(K\) to \(\{0,\ldots,n-1\}\). (It is also possible to use a different number of hash functions, but 3 is optimal.) For \(n\approx 1.23|K|\), BDZ is able to almost always solve the above linear system (if not, it tries again with different hash functions) in linear time using hypergraph peeling. Having \(w_{0},\ldots,w_{n-1}\), BDZ can map each \(k\in K\) to unique index \(h_{j(k)}(k)\) of \(\{0,\ldots,n-1\}\). However, since \(n>|K|\), some indices are left unused and a description of the mapping of the used indices to \(0,\ldots,|K|-1\) (which are the final values that MPHF assigns to the keys) is also stored. GOV (Govard et al., 2016) is similar to BDZ, but uses Gaussian elimination technique (with many practical improvements) to solve the linear system for \(n\approx 1.01|K|\). However, since Gaussian elimination is much slower than graph peeling, GOV distributes the keys into buckets and solves a number of smaller systems separately.

## 3. Fingerprint-based minimal perfect hash function (Fmph)

Let \(h_{0},h_{1},\ldots\) be independent, not necessarily perfect hash functions that can map keys to natural numbers in the range from \(0\) to a desired value and (at least approximately) satisfy the uniform hashing assumption. The following algorithm constructs a fingerprint-based minimal perfect hash function for a given key set \(K\) (Figure 1 shows an example):

Let \(K_{0}=K\). For successive level numbers \(l=0,1,\ldots\):

1. Use hash function \(h_{l}:K_{l}\rightarrow[0,|A_{l}|-1]\) to map all keys from \(K_{l}\) to indices of bit array \(A_{l}\). Set \(i\)-th \(\in\{0,\ldots,|A_{l}|-1\}\) bit of \(A_{l}\) to \(1\) if and only if \(h_{l}(k)=i\) for exactly one \(k\in K_{l}\) (i.e., when \(k\) does not collide with any other key). \(|A_{l}|\) should be greater or equal to \(|K_{l}|\).
2. Calculate the set of keys to be hashed at the next levels: \(K_{l+1}=\{k\in K_{l}:A_{l}[h_{l}(k)]=0\}\).
3. Stop if \(K_{l+1}=\emptyset\). The result is defined by the sequence \(A_{0},A_{1},\ldots,A_{l}\).

Let \(A\) be the bit array which is the concatenation of \(A_{0},A_{1},\ldots,A_{l}\). By construction, \(A\) has exactly \(|K|\) bits set to \(1\), and each such bit corresponds to exactly one key in \(K\). The evaluation (Figure 2 shows an example, and Figure 3 shows pseudocode) for any argument \(k\) starts with finding the

Figure 1. Example construction of a fingerprint-based minimal perfect hash function for the following keys: \(a,b,c,d,e,f,g\). First, all members of the input set \(K_{0}=\{a,b,c,d,e,f,g\}\) are mapped by \(h_{0}\) to indices of \(A_{0}\). Only the bits of \(A_{0}\) assigned to \(f\), \(b\), and \(e\) are set to \(1\), as these keys are the only ones which do not collide with any other key (i.e., which are mapped to unique indices of \(A_{0}\)). The other keys (\(K_{1}=\{a,c,d,g\}\)) are hashed by \(h_{1}\) to indices of \(A_{1}\). Keys \(g\) and \(d\) are uniquely placed and thus the bits of \(A_{1}\) assigned to them are set to \(1\). Since keys \(a\) and \(c\) collide, \(K_{2}=\{a,c\}\). Because \(h_{2}\) assigns them distinct indices of \(A_{2}\), the process ends. Figure 2 shows an example of determining a value of the constructed function.

Figure 2. Calculating \(H(g)\), where \(H\) is the fingerprint-based minimal perfect hash function whose construction is shown in Figure 1. \(A\) is the concatenation of \(A_{0}\), \(A_{1}\), and \(A_{2}\). First, the algorithm checks if \(A_{0}[h_{0}(g)]=1\). As it is not, the algorithm tests if \(A_{1}[h_{1}(g)]=1\). Since this is true, the process ends. \(H(g)\) is calculated as the number of ones in \(A\) that precede the position corresponding to the position \(h_{1}(g)\) of \(A_{1}\).

Initialize shift = 0 (shift indicates the first index of \(A_{l}\) in \(A\)), and for successive level numbers \(l=0,1,\ldots\):

1. Let \(i=\text{shift}+h_{l}(k)\).
2. If \(A[i]=1\) (equivalently: \(A_{l}[h_{l}(k)]=1\)) then return \(\text{rank}(A,i)\).
3. Set \(\text{shift}=\text{shift}+|A_{l}|\).

Inside \(i\) of the bit corresponding to \(k\), i.e., it starts with finding the lowest level number \(l\), such that \(A_{l}[h_{l}(k)]=1\) or, equivalently, such that \(A[i]=1\), where \(i=\sum_{p=0}^{l-1}|A_{p}|+h_{l}(k)\). Next, \(\text{rank}(A,i)\) is returned, where \(\text{rank}(A,i)=\sum_{b=0}^{i-1}A[b]\) is the number of ones in \(A\), up to position \(i\), excluded.

The final representation of the constructed hash function consists of: either \(A\) or \(A_{0},A_{1},\ldots,A_{l}\) and the auxiliary structure to support fast rank queries on \(A\) (possible implementations of such a structure are discussed for example in [11, 19]).

Based on the reasoning given in [5], the authors of [12] prove that if \(\gamma\geq 1\) and \(|A_{l}|=\gamma|K_{l}|\) at each level \(l\), then the expected number of keys which do not collide at level \(l\) is \(|K_{l}|e^{-1/\gamma}\). Then \(|K_{l}|=|K_{l-1}|(1-e^{-1/\gamma})\) and \(|A_{l}|=\gamma|K_{l}|=\gamma|K_{l-1}|(1-e^{-1/\gamma})=\gamma|K_{0}|(1-e^{-1/ \gamma})^{l}\). Finally, the expected length of \(A\) is \(\sum_{l}|A_{l}|=\gamma|K|\sum_{l}(1-e^{-1/\gamma})^{l}=\gamma|K|\frac{1}{1-(1- e^{-1/\gamma})}=\gamma e^{1/\gamma}|K|\) bits (note that \(0<1-e^{-1/\gamma}<1\) for \(\gamma\geq 1\)). It is minimal when \(|A_{l}|=|K_{l}|\) at each level \(l\)[5, 12]. However, one can use larger \(A_{l}\) arrays to reduce the total number of levels and therefore speed-up expected construction and evaluation times.

Since the sizes of subsequent levels are expected to decrease at a geometric rate, the expected number of levels (and thus the maximum number of levels visited during the evaluation) is \(\Theta(\log|K|)\), the expected average (over all keys) number of levels visited during evaluation is \(O(1)\), and the expected construction time is \(\Theta(|K|)\). Note that many implementations do not allow level sizes to drop below a certain threshold, for example [5] recommends the threshold of about 1000, while our implementation rounds up the sizes of all levels to multiples of 64.

The construction algorithm is fast and requires very little auxiliary memory (which is especially true for our implementation), as confirmed by both ours (see Section 7) and previous studies, such as those presented in [12]. To build the \(l\)-th level, an auxiliary array \(C_{l}\) (indicating which \(A_{l}\) indices are subject to collision) of size \(|A_{l}|\) bits is often sufficient (additional memory may be needed to represent the sets \(K_{1},K_{2},\ldots\), which is discussed in Section 5.2). Moreover, the \(C_{l}\) array can be freed as soon as the level is constructed and the memory can be reused for the next levels. Furthermore, the keys can be distributed among multiple threads, which can populate the \(A_{l}\) and \(C_{l}\) arrays in parallel, using the atomic memory access instructions available on modern CPUs. Such a parallelization method is used by the authors of [12] and also by the implementations tested in Section 7.

## 4 Fingerprint based perfect hashing with group optimization (fmpho)

The size of the minimal perfect hash function described in Section 3 can be reduced by optimizing the hash functions \(h_{0},h_{1},\ldots\). To do this efficiently, we propose to divide the levels into groups and for each group choose a hash function (one of several) that minimizes the number of collisions (Figure 4 shows an example). At each level \(l\), each group covers \(b\) consecutive bits of \(A_{l}\) (\(b\) is a parameter of our construction) and the \(l\)-th level consists of \(n_{l}\) groups (so \(|A_{l}|=n_{l}b\); note that it is reasonable to choose \(n_{l}=\lceil|K_{l}|/b\rceil\), as then \(|A_{l}|\geq|K_{l}|\) and \(|A_{l}|\approx|K_{l}|\)). The function \(h_{l}\) which assigns an index of \(A_{l}\) to any key \(k\) is of the form

\[h_{l}(k)=bg+d_{l,g}(k),\]

Figure 3: Pseudo-code of FMPH (see Section 3) and FMPHGO (see Section 4) evaluation. FMPHGO uses (in step 1) a specific \(h_{l}\) function whose pseudocode is shown in Figure 5.

where:

* \(g=g_{l}(k)\) is the number of the group assigned to key \(k\) at level \(l\) (by the function \(g_{l}:K\to\{0,\ldots,n_{l}-1\}\); \(g_{0},g_{1},\ldots\) are independent hash functions),
* and \(d_{l,g}(k)\) is the index of \(k\) inside the group \((d_{l,g}:K\to\{0,\ldots,b-1\})\).

For each level \(l\) and group \(g\), the function \(d_{l,g}\) is selected from the family of independent hash functions \(f_{l,0},\ldots,f_{l,r-1}\) (where \(r=2^{s}\), and \(s\) is a parameter of our construction) in such a way as to minimize the number of collisions in group \(g\) at level \(l\). The selection of the optimal function among \(f_{l,0},\ldots,f_{l,r-1}\) is done by examining them all. The index of the selected function (0, or 1,..., or \(r-1\)) is kept under the index \(g\) of the array \(G_{l}\), i.e., \(d_{l,g}=f_{l,G_{l}[g]}\). The array \(G_{l}\) consists of \(n_{l}\)\(s\)-bit integers, so its total size is \(n_{l}s\) bits. The arrays \(G_{0},G_{1},\ldots\) (or their concatenation) are part of the final representation of the constructed minimal perfect hash function. These arrays are read during evaluation, as can be seen in pseudocode shown in Figures 3 and 5.

Although selecting the optimal \(d_{l,g}\) functions requires examining \(r\) hash functions \(f_{l,0},\ldots,f_{l,r-1}\), we do not expect the total construction time to increase as much as \(r\) times. The reason is that many other operations are still performed only once (for example, building the structure to support rank queries), or once per level (for example, removing elements from the set of remaining keys). Moreover, thanks to the optimization, the sizes of successive sets of keys \(K_{1},K_{2},\ldots\), and thus the amount of work, should drop faster. The number of levels built may decrease too.

Fig. 4: Example construction of a fingerprint based perfect hash function with group optimization (with groups of size \(b=2\) bits and \(r=2^{s}=2^{1}=2\)) for the following keys: \(a,b,c,d,e,f,g\). First, the function \(g_{0}\) assigns the following group numbers to the keys in the set \(K_{0}=\{a,b,c,d,e,f,g\}\): \(g_{0}(a)=g_{0}(d)=0\), \(g_{0}(f)=1\), \(g_{0}(c)=g_{0}(g)=2\), \(g_{0}(b)=g_{0}(e)=3\). Next, functions \(f_{0,0}\) and \(f_{0,1}\) map the keys to indices inside the groups. In group 0, the function \(f_{0,0}\) performs better than \(f_{0,1}\) (in contrast to \(f_{0,1}\), \(f_{0,0}\) maps both keys, \(a\) and \(d\), without collisions). That is why \(G_{0}[0]=0\) and the \(A_{0}\) bits in group 0 are set according to \(f_{0,0}\). In group 1, both functions \(f_{0,0}\) and \(f_{0,1}\) work equally well. \(G_{0}[1]\) might as well be 0 or 1. In the example, \(G[1]=0\) and the \(A_{0}\) bits in group 1 are set according to \(f_{0,0}\). In groups 2 and 3, function \(f_{0,1}\) performs better than \(f_{0,0}\). Therefore, \(G[2]=G[3]=1\) and the \(A_{0}\) bits in both these groups are set according to \(f_{0,1}\). The function \(g_{0}\) together with the functions indicated by \(G\) assign distinct indices of \(A_{0}\) to all keys contained in \(K_{0}\). Therefore, further levels are not needed and the construction process ends.

Fig. 5: Pseudocode for calculating \(h_{l}(k)\) during FMPHGO evaluation, in step 1 of the pseudocode shown in Figure 3.

## 5. Fmph/Fmphgo implementation notes

### Efficient Hash Function and Structure to Support the Rank Queries

Our FMPH and FMPHGO implementations use the very fast _wyhash_[18] algorithm initialized with different seeds as a family of random hash functions. The same algorithm is used by Patrick Marks in his FMPH implementation called _boomphf_.

To support fast rank queries, our FMPH and FMPHGO implementations use a very compact structure based on the ideas described in [19]. Its memory overhead is only about 3.2%. In contrast, boomphf uses the same structure as authors of [12], which is simpler but adds about 12.5% memory overhead.

### Storing a Subset of Keys

One aspect of the implementation of FMPH and FMPHGO is how to represent the sets of remaining keys \(K_{0},K_{1},\ldots\). Of course, when the algorithm is allowed to modify the input set of keys \(K\), it can simply remove the keys assigned without collisions at successive levels, transforming \(K=K_{0}\) into \(K_{1}\), \(K_{1}\) into \(K_{2}\), and so on. However, all the algorithms benchmarked in Section 7 accept and are given read-only access to the vector of keys \(K\). Even with this assumption, it is possible to build FMPH(GO) without using additional memory by verifying (in expected constant time) the membership of any key to \(K_{l}\) using arrays \(A_{0},\ldots,A_{l-1}\) (the key is in \(K_{l}\) if and only if it has no corresponding one in any of the arrays \(A_{0},\ldots,A_{l-1}\)). However, iterating over all \(|K|\) keys at each level, increases the expected construction time to \(\Theta(|K|\log|K|)\) (as we expect \(\Theta(\log|K|)\) levels). To speed up construction (to \(\Theta(|K|)\)), the algorithm can store copies or indices of the remaining keys, starting at \(K_{1}\) or (to save memory at the expense of speed) later (for example, starting at \(K_{2}\)). Boomphf as well as our FMPH and FMPHGO implementations store the indices, beginning at \(K_{1}\). However, boomphf does this naively, using 64 bits per index on a 64-bit machine.

In contrast, our implementations divide the indices into segments. Each segment covers indices with the same integer part of division by 256. The remainders from division (by 256) of consecutive indices, of consecutive segments, are stored in a vector of 8-bit integers \(I\). The information about which segments are related to successive parts of \(I\) is stored in a separate vector \(S\). Each \(S\) entry describes a non-empty segment and consists of two (64-bit) indices, \(k_{b}\) and \(i_{b}\), which show the beginnings of the segment in \(K\) and \(I\), respectively (\(k_{b}\) is always a multiple of 256). So the segment contains the following keys: \(K[k_{b}+I[i_{b}+0]],K[k_{b}+I[i_{b}+1]],\ldots\) (the segment in \(I\) ends with the end of \(I\) or at the index immediately preceding the beginning of the next segment).

For example, the set of \(K\) indices \([19,183,513]\) is represented by \(I=[19\,\mathrm{mod}\,256,183\,\mathrm{mod}\,265,\)\(513\,\mathrm{mod}\,256]=[19,183,1]\) and \(S=[(0,0),(512,2)]\). \(S\) entries refer to two non-empty segments. The first contains the indices (of \(K\)) \(0+I[0+0]=19\) and \(0+I[0+1]=183\), while the second \(512+I[2+0]=513\).

Our structure has the advantage of being particularly effective when it is needed most, that is, right after it is built, when the segments are densely filled with indices. Then the size of \(S\) is negligible compared to \(I\) and the structure uses just over 8 bits per index. For example, \(K_{1}\) is described with about 9 bits per its element (4.5 bits per \(K\) element), assuming that it contains half of \(K\) elements.

All the necessary operations, such as removing the indices of selected keys, are as fast and almost as straightforward on our structure as on a regular vector of indices, and can usually be done with a single pass over \(I\) and \(S\).

### Pre-hashing in FMPHGO, Hash Caching in FMPH and FMPHGO

Our implementation of FMPHGO avoids hashing the key \(k\) twice for the purpose of determining \(g_{l}(k)\) and \(d_{l,g}(k)\). Instead, it first determines the 64-bit hash \(h=\mathrm{h}64_{l}(k)\) (using wyhash - seeSection 5.1), and then calculates \(g_{l}(k)\) and \(d_{l,g}(k)\) using \(h\) instead of \(k\). This method speeds up both evaluation and construction.

Construction can be sped up even more by calculating the h64 values for all keys included in \(K_{l}\) only once and caching them until the \(l\)-th level is constructed. In this way, all functions \(f_{l,0},\ldots,f_{l,\,r-1}\) can be examined without hashing each key \(r\) times. Additionally, the hash cache avoids hashing the keys while checking if they are assigned ones in \(A_{l}\) and should thus be removed from \(K_{l}\) when transforming \(K_{l}\) into \(K_{l+1}\) (see step 2 of the construction algorithm shown in Section 3). To speed up transforming \(K_{l}\) into \(K_{l+1}\), building an analogous cache is also reasonable for FMPH without group optimization. In this case, however, the cache should contain the values of the \(h_{l}\) function, which in our implementation are also represented with 64 bits.

Storing 64-bit hashes for all keys increases memory consumption and is therefore optional in our FMPH and FMPHGO implementations. In Section 7 we benchmark both variants, with and without hash caching.

Even though 64 bits/key is a lot compared to the remaining memory used to build the level (which, for FMPHGO, is about \(3\gamma\) bits/key including the memory occupied by the \(A_{l}\) itself, but excluding the cost described in Section 5.2), it still seems less than what non-fingerprint-based methods need. An exact comparison is difficult since publications on most of these methods do not contain enough information in this regard. But, for example, the RecSplit implementation described by its authors in [7] starts the construction by calculating (and caching) 128-bit unique hashes of all keys. And the PTHash [15] implementation developed by the method's authors contains an estimate_num_bytes_for_construction function that returns the predicted amount of memory needed during the construction (excluding memory occupied by the keys). This function returns values between 173 and 188 bits/key for the configurations tested in Section 7. Section 7 also contains measurements of actual memory consumption, which confirm our assumption.

### Multi-threaded FMPHGO Construction

Our FMPH and FMPHGO implementations employ the method mentioned in Section 3 (and described in [12]) that uses atomic memory accesses to parallelize the construction process.

However, FMPHGO can use an alternative parallelization method. Since the functions \(f_{l,0},\ldots,f_{l,\,r-1}\) are examined independently of each other, they can be tried by separate threads. This approach requires virtually no communication between threads and can therefore be faster. But it also consumes more memory because each thread holds and fills its own arrays. Our initial tests showed that the described method is faster, but only for small sets of keys. Therefore, we abandoned it for the sake of simplifying our FMPHGO implementation. We recommend limiting the possible use of the method to constructing only small levels (when \(|A_{l}|\) is below a certain threshold).

## 6. Benchmarks: FMPHGO Performance and Optimal Parameters

In this section, we check how _fingerprint based perfect hashing with group optimization_ (_FMPHGO_ for short) performs in practice. Tables 1 and 2 show its performance for all combinations of \(s\) from 1 to 9, some even1\(b\), and \(\gamma\) equal to 1 and 2 (see Section 4 for the definition of these parameters). The results contained in these tables are obtained for \(10^{8}\) 64-bit integer keys, but they are not expected to be noticeably dependent on either the number or type/size of keys.

Footnote 1: Odd \(b\) are omitted for readability as small changes in \(b\) have limited effect on performance.

The results show the high effectiveness of the optimization proposed in Section 4. The constructed function can occupy around as little as 2.1 bits per key (for example when \(\gamma=1\), \(s=8\), and \(b=32\)). Both the sizes and the average numbers of levels visited during the evaluation (and thus the evaluation times) decrease with increasing \(s\).

However, it is important to properly choose the optimal group size \(b\) depending on \(s\). In general, the larger \(s\), the larger \(b\) is worth using. However, for each \(s\), there is a range of reasonable values of \(b\), with different trade-offs between size and evaluation speed (as illustrated by the plot in Figure 6). The lowest average numbers of levels visited, and therefore the best evaluation times, are achieved for relatively small values of \(b\). Then the sizes \(|A_{0}|\), \(|A_{1}|\),... decrease rapidly, there are few levels and \(|A|\) is small. However, small \(b\) also lead to relatively large \(|G_{0}|\), \(|G_{1}|\),... (the size of \(G_{l}\) equals \(n_{l}s=\frac{|A_{l}|}{b}s\), which increases as \(b\) decreases). Therefore, the entire representation is smallest for larger \(b\) than that which minimizes only \(|A|\) (and therefore the average time consumed by the evaluation).

Increasing \(\gamma\) (with unchanged \(s\) and \(b\)), in turn, increases \(|A_{l}|=\gamma|K_{l}|\), \(n_{l}=|A_{l}|/b\), and decreases the average number of keys assigned to each group (\(|K_{l}|/n_{l}\)). These changes can be compensated for by increasing \(b\) and thus \(|K_{l}|/n_{l}\). This reasoning suggests that larger \(b\) is worth using for larger \(\gamma\), as confirmed by comparing Tables 1 and 2. Fortunately, as \(\gamma\) increases, so does the range of optimal choices of \(b\). Thus, the possibly largest \(s\) that is optimal for \(\gamma=1\) is also optimal for larger, reasonable values of \(\gamma\).

From a practical point of view, the most important are those among reasonable parameter values that divide the size of any of the available machine words without remainder, which facilitates efficient implementation. Examples of such values are: \(s=1\ b=8\); \(s=2\ b=16\); \(s=4\ b=16\); \(s=8\ b=32\). This is why we report the results for these parameters in Section 7 and compare them with the results obtained by other methods.

## 7. Benchmarks: Comparison of minimum perfect hash functions

### Experiment Methodology and Methods Tested

Tables 3, 4, and 5 compare the performance of the following implementations of minimal perfect hash functions:

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r} \hline \hline \multirow{2}{*}{b} & \multicolumn{10}{c}{s} \\ \cline{2-13}  & \multicolumn{1}{c}{1} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{2} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{3} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{4} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{5} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{6} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{7} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{8} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{9} \\ \hline

[MISSING_PAGE_POST]

 \hline \hline \end{tabular} The first value in each cell is the size in bits per key. The second (gray) value is the number of levels visited during the evaluation, averaged over all keys. The minimum value in each column is underlined. Figure 6 plots the values for \(s=4\).

\end{table}
Table 1.: Performance of FMPHGO for \(\gamma=1\) and Different Values of \(b\) and \(s\)

**FMPH, FMPHGO** are our implementation of fingerprint-based minimal perfect hash functions without and with group optimization, respectively.2 Section 5 gives details of these implementations and their differences from boomphf.

**boomphf**: is the implementation of fingerprint-based minimal perfect hash function developed by Patrick Marks.3

Footnote 2: The implementation source code is available at [https://github.com/beling/bsuccinct-rs](https://github.com/beling/bsuccinct-rs).
**PTHash**: is an implementation of the method described in [15], with the multi-threading construction capability described in [14], developed by the authors of the method and the papers.4 We use the same designations and values for the parameters as used in the paper [15] (in particular, the abbreviations C-C, D-D, EF indicate the integer compression methods used).

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r r} \hline \hline \multirow{2}{*}{b} & \multicolumn{10}{c}{**s**} \\ \cline{2-13}  & \multicolumn{1}{c}{1} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{2} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{3} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{4} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{5} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{6} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{7} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{8} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{9} \\ \hline

[MISSING_PAGE_POST]

**RecSplit**: is an implementation of the method described in [7], developed by the authors of the method and the paper.5 We use the same designations and values for the parameters as used in the paper [7].
**CHD**: is an implementation of the method described in [1], included in **CMPH (C Minimal Perfect Hashing Library).6 We test it with all \(\lambda\) (the average number of keys per bucket) values that lead to reasonable construction times.

Footnote 5: Its source code is available at [https://github.com/vigna/sux](https://github.com/vigna/sux).

Footnote 6: CMPH with its source code is freely available at [http://cmph.sourceforge.net/](http://cmph.sourceforge.net/).

FMPH, FMPHGO, and boomphf are written in the Rust language. We use our own program to benchmark them. This program, along with instructions for compiling and reproducing our entire experiment, is available at [https://crates.io/crates/mphf_benchmark](https://crates.io/crates/mphf_benchmark) (and also at [https://github.com/beling/bsuccinct-rs](https://github.com/beling/bsuccinct-rs)).

PTHash and RecSplit are written in C++, while CMPH (CHD) is in C. We benchmark them using a C++ program developed by Giulio Ermanno Pibiri and Roberto Trani, available at [https://github.com/roberto-trani/mphf_benchmark](https://github.com/roberto-trani/mphf_benchmark). The authors have accepted our modifications to their program, which, among other things, ensure that both benchmark programs can generate exactly the same keys for testing MPHFs.

The results in the tables are obtained for different sets of keys. Table 3 uses a collection of URLs from the \(.uk\) domain, collected in 2005 by UbiCrawler [2] and available at [https://law.di.unimi.it/webdata/uk-2005/](https://law.di.unimi.it/webdata/uk-2005/). This collection consists of 39,459,925 strings with an average length of 71.4 bytes and is used to test MPHF performance also in [14, 15]. To see the effect of key type/size on the results, Table 4 uses a set that has the same number (39,459,925) of keys, but consists of 64-bit integers generated uniformly at random. A similar, but larger, set of \(5\cdot 10^{8}\) 64-bit integers is used in Table 5.

Figure 6: The plot of size (red) and average number of levels visited during the evaluation (blue) against parameter \(b\) for FMPHGO \(\gamma=1\)\(s=4\). The dots at \(b=4\) and \(b=20\) indicate minimum values. Values of \(b\) in the range [4, 20] provide various optimal trade-offs between size and evaluation speed. Decreasing \(b\) below 4 as well as increasing above 20, increases size and average evaluation time simultaneously.

Successive columns of the tables show the following measured performance characteristics of the tested MPHFs:

* size in bits per key.
* evaluation speed averaged over all input keys and given both in nanoseconds and (in the case of boompf, FMPH, and FMPHGO) as the number of levels visited during the evaluation. Note that the average numbers of levels visited during the evaluation is equal to the average number of levels on which a key was processed (before they were assigned without collision) during construction.
* construction time (in seconds) when using single and (for algorithms with adequate capabilities) multiple threads. Additionally, the "+ hash cache" columns give construction times for FMPH and FMPHGO that cache 64-bit hashes, as described in Section 5.3.
* peak heap7 memory consumption (in bits per key) during construction, excluding the memory occupied by the (read-only vector of) keys. We measured memory consumption both when single and multiple threads were used. In the case of FMPH, FMPHGO, and PTHash, we obtained almost the same results in both cases

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c c c c c c c c c c} \hline \hline \multirow{2}{*}{method} & \multirow{2}{*}{parameters} & \multirow{2}{*}{size} & \multicolumn{3}{c}{evaluation speed} & \multicolumn{4}{c}{construction} \\ \cline{4-13}  & & & & \multicolumn{2}{c}{bits} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{(levels)} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{(ns)} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{time [s]} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{memory} \\ \cline{4-13}  & & & & \multicolumn{2}{c}{bits} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{key} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{(levels)} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{(ns)} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{single thread} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{cache} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{multiple threads} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\begin{tabular}{c} +hash \\ \end{tabular} } & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\begin{tabular}{c} +hash \\ \end{tabular} } & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\begin{tabular}{c} [bits] \\ \end{tabular} } & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\begin{tabular}{c} [ks] \\ \end{tabular} } & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\begin{tabular}{c} [ks] \\ \end{tabular} } & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\begin{tabular}{c} [ks] \\ \end{tabular} } & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\begin{tabular}{c} [ks] \\ \end{tabular} } & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\begin{tabular}{c} [ks] \\ \end{tabular} } & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\begin{tabular}{c} [ks] \\ \end{tabular} } & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\begin{tabular}{c} [ks] \\ \end{tabular} } & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\begin{tabular}{c} [ks] \\ \end{tabular} } & \multicolumn{1}{c}{
\begin{tabular}{c} [ks] \\ \end{tabular} } \\ \hline \multirow{4}{*}{FMPHGO} & \(s=1\) & \(b=8\) & \(\begin{array}{c}y=1\\ y=2\end{array}\) & \(2.52\) & \(2.18\) & \(83\) & \(10.93\) & \(4.10\) & \(1.77\) & \(1.03\) & \(8\) & \(70\) \\  & & \(y=2\) & \(3.15\) & \(1.36\) & \(72\) & \(8.15\) & \(3.02\) & \(1.13\) & \(0.63\) & \(7\) & \(70\) \\ \cline{2-13}  & \(s=2\) & \(b=16\) & \(\begin{array}{c}y=1\\ y=2\end{array}\) & \(2.36\) & \(2.04\) & \(79\) & \(15.93\) & \(4.39\) & \(2.72\) & \(1.20\) & \(7\) & \(70\) \\  & & \(y=2\) & \(2.92\) & \(1.26\) & \(63\) & \(12.92\) & \(3.97\) & \(1.71\) & \(0.75\) & \(6\) & \(70\) \\ \cline{2-13}  & \(s=4\) & \(b=16\) & \(\begin{array}{c}y=1\\ y=2\end{array}\) & \(2.21\) & \(1.73\) & \(70\) & \(40.56\) & \(6.56\) & \(7.57\) & \(2.27\) & \(6\) & \(69\) \\  & & \(y=2\) & \(2.86\) & \(1.12\) & \(54\) & \(39.93\) & \(10.18\) & \(4.73\) & \(1.60\) & \(7\) & \(71\) \\ \cline{2-13}  & \(s=8\) & \(b=32\) & \(\begin{array}{c}y=1\\ y=2\end{array}\) & \(2.10\) & \(1.64\) & \(64\) & \(555.01\) & \(59.15\) & \(107.32\) & \(27.98\) & \(6\) & \(69\) \\  & & \(y=2\) & \(2.72\) & \(1.06\) & \(46\) & \(570.58\) & \(138.09\) & \(64.20\) & \(18.89\) & \(7\) & \(71\) \\ \hline FMPH & & \(\begin{array}{c}y=1\\ y=2\end{array}\) & \(\begin{array}{c}2.80\) & \(2.72\) & \(79\) & \(8.48\) & \(4.35\) & \(1.45\) & \(0.98\) & \(8\) & \(71\) \\  & & \(y=2\) & \(3.40\) & \(1.65\) & \(74\) & \(5.86\) & \(2.59\) & \(0.87\) & \(0.56\) & \(7\) & \(70\) \\ \hline \multirow{4}{*}{boomphf} & \(\begin{array}{c}y=1\\ y=2\end{array}\) & \(\begin{array}{c}3.06\) & \(2.72\) & \(84\) & \(9.36\) & \(1.57\) & \(85\) (mt: 97) \\  & & \(y=2\) & \(3.71\) & \(1.65\) & \(72\) & \(6.77\) & \(1.09\) & \(46\) (mt: 56) \\ \hline \multirow{4}{*}{PTHash} & C-C & \(\alpha=0.99\) & \(c=7\) & \(3.25\) & & \(38\) & \(10.03\) & & \(5.19\) & \(201\) \\  & D-D & \(\alpha=0.88\) & \(c=11\) & \(4.09\) & & \(50\) & \(6.01\) & \(4.82\) & \(238\) \\  & EF & \(\alpha=0.99\) & \(c=6\) & \(2.28\) & & \(53\) & \(13.34\) & & \(6.19\) & \(213\) \\  & D-D & \(\alpha=0.94\) & \(c=7\) & \(3.11\) & & \(41\) & \(8.41\) & \(4.69\) & \(201\) \\ \hline \multirow{2}{*}{RecSplit} & \(\begin{array}{c}\ell=5\\ \ell=8\end{array}\) & \(b=5\) & \(2.95\) & & \(100\) & \(6.03\) & & \(182\) \\  & \(\ell^{\prime}=8\) & \(b=100\) & & \(1.79\) & \(107\) & \(39.35\) & & \(132\) \\  & & \(\ell^{\prime}=12\) & \(b=9\) & & \(2.23\) & & \(80\) & \(23.14\) & & \(159\) \\ \hline \multirow{4}{*}{CHD} & \(\begin{array}{c}\lambda=1\\ \lambda=2\end{array}\) & \(\begin{array}{c}3.56\\ 2.54\end{array}\) & \(\begin{array}{c}173\\ 146\\ 146\\ \lambda=3\end{array}\) & \(\begin{array}{c}9.30\\ 2.27\end{array}\) & \(\begin{array}{c}9.30\\ 144\\ 144\\ \lambda=3\end{array}\) & \(\begin{array}{c}201\\ 2.27\end{array}\) & \(\begin{array}{c}144\\ 13.01\end{array}\) & & \(213\) \\  & \(\lambda=4\) & \(2.17\) & \(139\) & \(24.04\) & & \(201\) \\  & & \(\lambda=5\) & \(2.07\) & \(140\) & \(62.53\) & & \(201\) \\  & & \(\lambda=6\) & \(2.01\) & \(141\) & \(241.04\) & & \(238\) \\ \hline \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Performance Comparison of Minimal Perfect Hash Functions for a Set of Keys Consisting of 39,459,925 Unique Strings (URLs from uk2005 Collection) with an Average Length of 71.4 bytes(maximum difference of less than 0.1 bits/key). Therefore, for the sake of readability, we decided to put only the values for single-threaded calculations in the tables. However, for boompf, the values for multiple threads are noticeably larger, so we report them additionally in parentheses.

In the "+ hash cache" column, we report the memory consumption (in bits per key) of FMPH and FMPHGO with the hash caching, which, as we predicted in Section 5.3, significantly increases this consumption.

We measure memory consumption using the _memusage_ profiler, which is written by Ulrich Drepper and is part of the GNU C library. This tool tracks all memory allocations and deallocations (calls to malloc, calloc, free, etc.) made by the program and provides accurate and reproducible measurements. More information can be found in [6, 17].

All times are measured on a computer with an AMD Ryzen 5600G @3.9GHz (6 cores, 12 threads, 384KB/3MB/16MB of level 1/2/3 cache) processor and are averaged over 30 runs (except for the construction times in Table 5, which are averaged over 5 runs). Multithreaded calculations use 12 threads (with 6 threads all methods run slightly slower). Note that conclusions drawn from measured times should be treated with some caution, as they are dependent on the details of the implementation, compiler, hardware, and so on.

* See Section 7.1 for more details.

\end{table}
Table 4: Performance Comparison of Minimal Perfect Hash Functions for a Set of Keys Consisting of 39,459,925 Unique 64-bits Integers Generated Uniformly at Random

### Discussion of the Results

The sizes (in bits/key) of the tested MPHFs depend on neither the type nor the number (except for PTHash) of keys. Therefore, we can compare the sizes using any of the tables. Comparing Tables 3 and 4, we can see that increasing the size of keys (and therefore the times needed to hash them) slows down both evaluation and construction of all the MPHFs tested. This is especially true for the fingerprint-based MPHFs, since they hash the keys multiple times (but, understandably, hash caching significantly reduces build slowdowns). Comparing Tables 4 and 5, we can see that increasing the number of keys also slows down all the MPHFs tested. Interestingly, the slowdown in evaluation is caused only by the increased number of CPU cache misses, not by the increased number of operations performed (the tested MPHFs have constant expected evaluation complexity, which for the fingerprint-based MPHFs is confirmed by the lack of differences between the tables in the "evaluation speed [levels]" column).

By using a more succinct structure to support rank queries (see Section 5.1), FMPH is about 8.5% smaller than boomphf with the same parameters. FMPHGO reduces the size further, but at the cost of longer construction time. The difference increases with increasing \(s\). For instance, for \(\gamma=1\), FMPHGO is smaller than FMPH by about: 10% for \(s=1\), 16% for \(s=2\), 21% for \(s=4\), and 25% for \(s=8\). At the same time, assuming no hash caching, its build time is longer by about: 1.2-1.8 times for \(s=1\), 1.8-2.8 times for \(s=2\), 5-8 times for \(s=4\), and 65-122 times for \(s=8\). With hash

caching, the differences are smaller. Admittedly, caching reduces the build time of both functions, but FMPHGO benefits from it more than FMPH, which is as expected. The greatest benefit of hash caching is obviously seen in Table 3, where it results in avoiding multiple hashing of large keys. In this case, the differences in construction times between FMPH and FMPHGO (with caching) are relatively smallest, for \(s=1\) even negligible. This is because FMPHGO reduces the size of successive levels faster and, as a result, performs less expensive key hashing than FMPH (from the "evaluation speed [levels]" column, we can read that for \(\gamma=1\), FMPH hashes each key 2.72 times on average, while FMPHGO \(s=1\ b=8\), 2.52 times).

Multithreading reduces FMPH and FMPHGO build times more than hash caching does. Unfortunately, multithreading does not speed up variants with hash caching as much as those without it. In a few cases, the combination of both techniques even leads to longer construction times than multithreading alone (see FMPHGO \(s=1\ b=8\) and FMPH in Table 4). Without caching, FMPH and FMPHGO benefit more from multithreading than PTHash. With caching, the benefit comparison is no longer so clear-cut.

FMPHGO is more space efficient than PTHash and about on par with CHD. Only RecSplit can achieve a significantly smaller size. Compared to PTHash and CHD variants of similar sizes, FMPHGO typically takes less time to build, especially when it caches hashes (which is important for large keys) or uses multiple threads. As an example, please compare variants with sizes around 2.2 bits/key, that is, FMPHGO \(s=4\ b=16\ \gamma=1\) with PTHash EF \(\alpha=0.99\ c=6\), and with CHD \(\lambda=3\) or \(\lambda=4\).

In terms of evaluation speed, FMPHGO, FMPH, and boomphf perform more or less similarly and are generally fast, faster than RecSplit, much faster than CHD, and slower only than PTHash. For the same \(\gamma\), compared to FMPH (or boomphf), FMPHGO visits fewer levels on average during the evaluation, and therefore hashes the key fewer times. The difference increases with \(s\). However, FMPHGO performs additional operations at each level, including reading from the \(G_{l}\) array (see pseudocode in Figure 5) that can cause a CPU cache miss. The small difference in evaluation speeds is therefore not surprising, especially since both algorithms also use about the same amount of time to perform a rank query. In our tests for 64-bit keys (Tables 4 and 5), FMPH (as well as boomphf) is slightly faster than FMPHGO with the same \(\gamma\), but the advantage decreases with increasing \(s\). FMPHGO with \(s\geq 2\) is slightly faster than FMPH for large keys (Table 3). FMPHGO variants with larger \(\gamma\) values may provide a faster to evaluate but slower to build alternative to FMPH variants of similar size. For example, FMPHGO \(s=8\ b=32\ \gamma=2\) is significantly faster and at the same time slightly smaller than FMPH \(\gamma=1\).

The results shown in the "memory" column do not substantially depend on either the number or size of the keys, and are therefore similar in all tables. They confirm the observation in [12] that fingerprint-based minimal perfect hash functions can be constructed with very limited memory. Group optimization does not change much in this regard. The measured peak memory consumption is almost the same for FMPH and FMPHGO (about 6-8 bits/key). At the same time, it is much lower than that for boomphf (about 46-111 bits/key), which is mainly thanks to the compact representation of key sets described in Section 5.2. As predicted in Section 5.3, caching hashes significantly increases memory consumption during the construction of FMPH and FMPHGO (to about 69-71 bits/key). This consumption is then similar to that for boomphf and is still noticeably lower than those for the other methods tested. Among them, RecSplit stands out positively. For \(\ell^{\prime}=8\ b=100\) (that is, for the parameters that lead to the smallest size, 1.8 bits/key) it consumes 132 bits/key, which is only a little more than is occupied by the 128-bit hashes of the keys it uses during construction. The values measured for PTHash are slightly larger than those predicted (173-188 bits/key) by the estimate_num_bytes_for_construction function mentioned in Section 5.3.

## 8. Conclusions

Different minimal perfect hashing functions offer different trade-offs between the memory needed to build and represent them and the speed of evaluation and building. PTHash (Pethash, 2015) is unbeatable in terms of evaluation speed, and RecSplit (Boldi et al., 2017) in terms of size. _Fingerprint-based minimal perfect hash function_ (_FMPH_ for short) (Boldi et al., 2017; Pethash, 2015; Pethash, 2015), which is the focus of this paper, is unrivaled in terms of memory consumption during construction, additionally offering quite fast evaluation. However, FMPH takes about 3 bits per key, which is significantly more than the mentioned competitors and often makes it unattractive. Fortunately, we have been able to develop an enhancement called FMPHGO (which we present in Section 4) that reduces the size of FMPH. In addition, we also empirically find the optimal parameters for FMPHGO (in Section 6) and discussed how to effectively implement FMPH and FMPHGO (in Section 5). Our benchmarks in Sections 6 and 7 show that with FMPHGO and an efficient structure to support the rank queries, the FMPH size can be reduced to about 2.1 bits/key, which is close to the size achieved by state-of-the-art methods and noticeably larger only compared to RecSplit. FMPHGO retains many advantages of FMPH, such as good evaluation speed (only PTHash is faster in our benchmarks) and very low memory consumption during construction. Unfortunately, FMPHGO significantly increases the construction time, which, however, is still competitive with methods of similar space efficiency (like CHD or PTHash), and seems to be good enough for practical applications.

Nevertheless, accelerating FMPHGO may be a goal for further research. A potential avenue to achieve this goal is to improve the technique described in Section 5.3. Perhaps cached (64-bit) key hashes could be used at several subsequent levels. This could speed up not only construction, but also evaluation (which would no longer require hashing at each level). Another direction for further work could involve potentially applying the idea behind the method proposed in Section 4 to improve a different minimal perfect hash function.

## References

* (1)
* ESA 2009_, Amos Fiat and Peter Sanders (Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Berlin, 682-693.
* Boldi et al. (2004) Paolo Boldi, Bruno Codenotti, Massimo Santini, and Sebastiano Vigna. 2004. UbiCrawler: A scalable fully distributed web crawler. _Software: Practice & Experience_ 34, 8 (2004), 711-726.
* Botelho et al. (2005) Fabiano C. Botelho, Yoshiharu Kohayakawa, and Nivio Ziviani. 2005. A practical minimal perfect hashing method. In _Experimental and Efficient Algorithms_, Sotiris E. Nikoletseas (Ed.). Springer, Berlin, Berlin, 488-500.
* Botelho et al. (2007) Fabiano C. Botelho, Rasmus Pagh, and Nivio Ziviani. 2007. Simple and space-efficient minimal perfect hash functions. In _Algorithms and Data Structures_, Frank Dehne, Jorg-Rudiger Sack, and Norbert Zeh (Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Berlin, 139-150.
* Chapman et al. (2011) Jarrod A. Chapman, Isaac Ho, Sirisha Sunkara, Shujun Luo, Gary P. Schroth, and Daniel S. Rokhsar. 2011. Meraculous: De novo genome assembly with short paired-end reads. _PLOS ONE_ 6, 8 (08 2011), 1-13. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0023501](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0023501)
* Drepper (2007) Ulrich Drepper. 2007. _What Every Programmer Should Know About Memory_.
* Esposito et al. (1998) Emmanuel Esposito, Thomas Mueller Graf, and Sebastiano Vigna. _RecSplit: Minimal Perfect Hashing via Recursive Splitting_. 175-185. [https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611976007.14](https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611976007.14) arXiv:[https://epubs.siam.org/doi/pdf/10.1137/1.9781611976007.14](https://epubs.siam.org/doi/pdf/10.1137/1.9781611976007.14)
* Fox et al. (1992) Edward A. Fox, Qi Fan Chen, and Lenwood S. Heath. 1992. A faster algorithm for constructing minimal perfect hash functions. In _Proceedings of the 15th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR'92)_. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 266-273. [https://doi.org/10.1145/133160.133209](https://doi.org/10.1145/133160.133209)
* Fredman and Komlos (1984) Michael L. Fredman and Janos. Komlos. 1984. On the size of separating systems and families of perfect hash functions. _SIAM Journal on Algebraic Discrete Methods_ 5, 1 (1984), 61-68. [https://doi.org/10.1137/0605009](https://doi.org/10.1137/0605009)
* Genuzio et al. (2020) Marco Genuzio, Giuseppe Ottaviano, and Sebastiano Vigna. 2020. Fast scalable construction of ([compressed] static | minimal perfect hash) functions. _Information and Computation_ 273 (2020), 104517. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ic.2020.104517](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ic.2020.104517) DCC (Data Compression Conference) 2018.

* [11] Rodrigo Gonzalez, Szymon Grabowski, Veli Makinen, and Gonzalo Navarro. 2005. Practical implementation of rank and select queries. In _Poster Proceedings Volume of 4th Workshop on Efficient and Experimental Algorithms (WEA'05) (Greece)_. 27-38.
* [12] Antoine Limasset, Guillaume Rizk, Rayan Chikhi, and Pierre Peterlongo. 2017. Fast and scalable minimal perfect hashing for massive key sets. In _16th International Symposium on Experimental Algorithms (SEA 2017) (Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs))_, Vol. 75. Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany. 25:1-25:16. [https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.SEA.2017.25](https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.SEA.2017.25)
* [13] Ingo Muller, Peter Sanders, Robert Schulze, and Wei Zhou. 2014. Retrieval and perfect hashing using fingerprinting. In _Experimental Algorithms_, Joachim Gudmundsson and Jyrki Katajainen (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 138-149.
* [14] Giulio Ermanno Pibiri and Roberto Trani. 2021. Parallel and external-memory construction of minimal perfect hash functions with PTHash. _CoRR_ abs/2106.02350 (2021). arXiv:2106.02350 [https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.02350](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.02350).
* [15] Giulio Ermanno Pibiri and Roberto Trani. 2021. _PTHash: Revisiting FCH Minimal Perfect Hashing_. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1339-1348. [https://doi.org/10.1145/3404835.3462849](https://doi.org/10.1145/3404835.3462849)
* [16] Jaikumar Radhakrishnan. 1992. Improved bounds for covering complete uniform hypergraphs. _Inform. Process. Lett._ 41, 4 (1992), 203-207. [https://doi.org/10.1016/0020-0190](https://doi.org/10.1016/0020-0190)(92)90181-T
* [17] Peter Schiffer, Michael Kerrisk, and Jan Chaloupka. 2021. _memusage(1) Linux User's Manual_ (5.13 ed.).
* [18] Yi Wang. [n. d.]. wyhshah. [https://github.com/wangyi-fudan/wyhshah](https://github.com/wangyi-fudan/wyhshah). [accessed 18 Jun. 2022].
* [19] Dong Zhou, David G. Andersen, and Michael Kaminsky. 2013. Space-efficient, high-performance rank and select structures on uncompressed bit sequences. In _Experimental Algorithms, 12th International Symposium, SEA 2013, Rome, Italy, June 5-7, 2013. Proceedings (Lecture Notes in Computer Science)_, Vincenzo Bonifaci, Cami Demetrescu, and Alberto Marchetti-Spaccamela (Eds.), Vol. 7933. Springer, 151-163. [https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-38527-8_15](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-38527-8_15) 


